Well, no. The replacement rate is 2.1
Anecdotal evidence is irrelevant.
3 point...
No, I'm saying that the replacement rate is 2.1.
Yes, I know.
I'm not saying between these four families, we've got 3.5.
So we can-
And I'm just saying that doesn't evidence at all
Oh, I'm not saying it's evidence of anything.
I'm just saying that we can-
Well, I think we should-
... engage in the process.
All right. Shall we welcome our esteemed,
very esteemed
visitor.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr McClean.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon.
Now, we'll just introduce ourselves.
I'm Greg O'Connor, the chair of the committee,
and
my right.
Uh, Greg Fleming, uh, MP for Maungakiekie.
Hello, Greg. I'm Paulo Garcia, National MP for
New Lynn. Mr Coleman. Oh.
Hello, I'm Celia Wade-Brown. I'm one of the Green List MP.
Good.
I live in the Wairarapa now.
Good morning. Good afternoon. Yes.
Good afternoon. Well, we've read your submission, um, so we're very
interested to hear from you. Um, we have 10 minutes as
generally for our submitters, but, uh, would be appreciated if you'd leave
us some time for questions.
Sure.
Thank you.
Well, thank you, Mr Chair. First, may I pay my respects to the committee for
your mana, for your experience, and for the job that you do.
Uh, this petition seeks a New Zealand
response to the global fall in fertility.
It's got general support from Len Cook, who you may know.
And Sir Peter Gluckman, his institute has just produced
a report with almost identical headline
recommendation, very similar recommendations.
It deals with the drop in global fertility. Uh, the first cha...
I'm sorry. I've got to wave to somebody. Anna.
First chart, please.
Keep going.
Yes. The drop in global fertility since, uh,
1960. The top line is New Zealand.
Sorry, top line is the world, the
next line is New Zealand, and the dotted line is the
rate which would give a population replacement.
Mm-hmm.
Next, please.
This is looking at it a different way, the effect of the drop in
fertility going back to 1700.
The heavy line is the growth rate
in world population, the growth rate.
And you can see it grew more or less steadily, the ups and downs.
It took off,
uh, around about 1900. At about
1964, there was a point of inflection,
and the
world population started growing more
slowly, and has been growing more slowly, uh,
right down to the present day, and is projected to grow more
slowly till it flips over again in about, uh, 50
years or so, and the top of population starts
decreasing. Thank you.
Looking even longer term, go back to 10,000 BC,
and this is the world population as a whole, not the growth
rate, the world population. And that, again, was reasonably
steady, there were fluctuations, uh, until it took off.
And it took off, and you can see how huge the spike in
population has been. Uh, the vertical line is the
present day. Uh, the dotted lines are possible futures,
uh, with different, uh, rates of fertility.
But you can see what went up exponentially, uh,
comes down exponentially. Thank you.
Um,
so what's the New Zealand response to that required?
Mm-hmm.
A low fertility is very hard to reverse.
Uh, no country in the world succeeded, and, uh, New
Zealand,
it must seek to reverse it long term, but in the
meantime must
deal with the very difficult effects. Thank you.
Uh, I want to focus on two of them. One is the skills gap,
and the other is the cost of aging population.
There are other effects. Thank you.
Uh, on the skills gap,
the global competition for skills is increasing
as more and more countries are facing lower
fertility,
workforce is shrinking, and with it, the skilled
workforce is shrinking.
New Zealand has used immigration to fill its skills gaps,
uh, and won't be able to do so in the future, in
my view, and will face further brain drain and more
difficulty getting the high-quality immigrants we've had in the past.
So we must develop our own skills. The New Zealand
population is aging. Next, please.
Uh, the cost of super's increasing, cost of health and healthcare,
and there are more elderly and fewer workers
supporting them.
And so,
looking at this problem, departments aren't set up to deal with
a problem of this kind. There's a blueprint needed
urgently.
Past reforms have shown it can be done, and there are two
examples there.
And my petition seeks a small expert task
force to plan the New Zealand strategy.
I commend the petition to you, Mr Chairman and members.
All right. Thank you very much. And, uh, please can we just, uh, did a little
informal survey of the members that we have, um,
on average, without breaching anyone's privacy, we have, on average, we
are in excess ofAs members,
the required population rate-
Right
... in our breeding activities.
Good.
So look, okay. So questions?
Yeah. The graph that shows the
projection
of the... Oh, we can all remember it-
4,000
... because obviously we read it as well.
That long term-
It's from a paper in the literature.
The
basic data comes from United Nations population data.
Yeah.
The projection is assuming that nothing
changes, except
the total fertility rate and those three lines.
Can we
go back to that chart please?
Which one?
The one stating world population.
Yeah. As I say, we all know, it doesn't have to go there.
I've just-
I can get you the reference from the literature.
Yeah. I'd just be-
That'd be helpful
... I'd just be interested to see, obviously the way that graph has been put
together, it looks precipitous, the
drop, but that's because of how the x-axis is set.
It's actually a
logarithmic scale, and if you didn't do it on a logarithmic
scale, it would be even more precipitous.
No, what I'm meaning is that... Well, maybe we should bring it up.
I'm just fascinated. I don't want to get down late on it, but it's just if you go
to the
left of that, if you go to the left, it shows
the 1,000 years.
Oh, it's-
If that-
The next one up you're talking, or the next one down?
Next one. Yeah.
Yeah. So it's to the, yeah, the next one. That one there.
Okay, so we're at where the gray line is. Is that right?
Where there's a vertical line, yeah.
Well, that was-
A vertical line
... a couple of years ago.
Yeah. So if you just look between 1,000...
Oh, sorry, that's 1,000 AD. I'm not used to the CE thing.
No. This-
Current era
... that's the-
Yeah. It's, oh-
Or is it the latest current-
Because the current era is measured from the birth of Christ, so it's all a little
ridiculous really. Okay, so that's what threw me.
So 1 CE is-
Yeah. Okay
Is 1,000-
So I read that as
1,000 BC. Okay. Yep. So that makes sense. Okay.
That's
1,000 AD up to which we are there. So in the last 1,000 years, then it drops to
there. Good heavens. So what is that date at which it
hits the bottom and then skirts to the right?
Where the dotted line falling?
That's not quite clear. That's in several
centuries.
Yeah. It's in several centuries. According to
when the total fertility rate, what happens to the total
fertility rate, those three lines are different levels of
fertility, and those are
several centuries away, as far as I could gather.
Right.
Is that the Industrial Revolution where it-
It's
a little after the Industrial Revolution.
It started to take off at the Industrial Revolution, and then
it was a number of other things. It was
a reduction in child mortality-
Mm
... which was in part due to better sanitation.
It was due to better nutrition, to
new foods coming to Europe from
the Americas, maize and-
Yeah
... potatoes.
So nutrition and
better health,
lower mortality-
Yeah
... and so there wasn't a need for so many children to be
born-
Mm
... to maintain families.
Yeah.
I had a
question about
the future side of the graph.
Yes.
It seems whichever of the particular
total fertility rates one chooses,
it seems to just go down and bottom out-
Yeah
... rather than echoing the shape of the one before.
My understanding from this was that once you
get...
It's sort of self-reinforcing, the total fertility rate, in that
even if the new cohort of women
have, which there are fewer of them each time, therefore,
you're just not going to-
Yeah. That's right
... change direction. So why do you see it as bottoming
out rather than going down further?
Well, this is basically what the mathematics does of an
exponential rise and an exponential decline.
And then it just flattens.
Yeah. It flattens. But in the meantime, you're going through two things.
One is the question is whether civilization can survive.
Yeah.
And finally, and it's not a totally
implausible, is whether
humans become extinct or not.
That's absolutely right. I think.
And those questions I haven't adverted to much, but-
Yeah
... they are important.
Nobody will raise those during an election campaign,
but it's the immediate effects on New Zealand that I've tried to concentrate on.
And look, and I'll bring us back. We could probably spend a lot of
time on those graphs and algorithms.
But
now what we come to is your petition, which is the fact
we need now... Originally, we sent this petition off to
another
group. Who did we send it to?
Foreign Affairs.
Foreign Affairs, and they were doing a
study into long-term-
Insights briefing
... insights briefing.
So they sent it back.
Presumably they will have covered a bit of this material, or perhaps not, but
anyway, it's back again, and it behoves us to work out
what we do with it.
Yeah.
With this information that we have.Would it, and
the reality of it, the world is full and New Zealand's full of
studies.
What could happen that would make any difference?
Because at the end of the day,
we're either breeding or we're not.
Is that right? Because what you took by New Zealand standards, because if you'd
been in the House listening before-
Mm
... we're all talking about immigration.
Mm.
And all coming at it from
our own political points of view.
Yeah.
Mm.
But the reality of what we're going to require to fill the immigration-
No
... that our brighter, it would appear anecdotally, our
brighter young things are going away, and we need to backfill
with
brighter, younger things from somewhere else.
Mm.
That's essentially it.
If we can get them. And my point is that it's going to be much
harder to get them.
Yeah.
And they're going to be more expensive, and just like the brain drain to
Australia-
Mm
... countries that can pay more will attract ours-
... and we'll have difficulty competing-
Yeah
... for the very good immigrants from overseas.
Mm.
My concern is
it will take time because of demographic momentum, it
will take time
for anybody to change the way the
population's moving.
But what's needed immediately is a
cohesive approach to the effects on New Zealand,
and the effects are not one by one local things.
They're part of a worldwide trend which has been going on a
while. And if New Zealand tries to fix New Zealand Super,
for example-
Yeah
... for something which will last 20 years,
it's not going to be much use. If New Zealand is looking
for skills and say, "Okay, for the next 5 or 10 years we can
import some more,"
we're digging a hole for ourselves.
And I'm suggesting that we need now to look at
the adjustments that we have to make to cope with the
transition.
This is, can I just one thing before I go to-
Lots of questions
There's nothing that you have told us that we don't know.
In fact, if you listen to question time the last three days, just about
every topic that you've brought up has been covered by, and
even some of the legislation that's going through the House has been covered-
And
... piecemeal, and that's the whole point you're making. So Celia.
Well, I have to say this before I go to my question.
I think they see it as a short-term problem.
I don't think there's that many people in the House that
comprehend that exponential-
Well, in fact-
... graph, to be fair.
Yeah.
So I'm not sure that they... I think they're seeing it as an immediate
brain drain to Australia rather than a
fundamental-
No
... structural-
No, I think you're right
... fertility issue. So I think we should not
be too complacent that our colleagues
do get this-
Yeah
... necessarily. But what I wanted to ask was, you say no
country has succeeded in reversing low fertility.
Are there some regions or cities that you might be aware of
that have given much more generous parental
leave or things like that have made some difference?
There's no evidence that any of them have made a
sustained change in the trend.
Mm.
They've halted it. They've lifted a little bit, and South
Korea is at the present time has lifted just a fraction,
but for about two years. But there's
no sustained rise. Nowhere in the world that I'm aware
of, there's been a sustained rise.
And this is where you get to the horrible things like Handmaid's Tale and all
that.
No.
Have you read Margaret Atwood's The Handmaid's Tale?
No, I haven't.
I would thoroughly recommend.
Oh, yes, I have. Yes, I'm sorry. Yes, I have. Yes.
Okay, look, we're going to have to keep moving, but the one thing I just have with
South Korea, is that
indigenous, their reversal,
or is that through immigration or a combination of-
No, it's indigenous.
It's entirely indigenous. And South Korea,
like Japan, restricts immigration, see.
Yeah.
But could I just refer to one thing?
I think you mentioned, Mr. Chair, the
things like task forces, a lot of them are just a waste of time.
They're not all-
Well, no, not a waste of time, but they could come up with an answer that we knew
before they started.
Well, some of them don't, and I cited two that don't from
different parties. One was the Woodhouse ACC
and
Tomorrow's Schools, PICO's Tomorrow Schools, which
David Lange implemented. Both of those made dramatic
changes. They worked quickly, and they
made huge changes in New Zealand society.
And so it is possible with the right task force,
the right
leadership, and keep it small, keep it tight, keep it quick,
to produce results.
Mm.
All right. Well, look, okay. I like your
optimism,
combined with the three-year political cycle,
but whatever we do, it's got to be outside every political cycle.
It's got to be an agreed-
Yes
Because it's also about education, isn't it?
Because the people that are having the children are the ones who are the poorest
educated. So that's yet another issue.
Yeah.
So it needs to involve every dimension-
Yeah
... of every department,
and private and public. So look, well, thank you very much.
Yeah.
We could be, as I say, we have got unfortunately a fairly heavy workload this
afternoon, so we have to keep moving.
But we could be here till 5:00 just talking on this
topic.
Really appreciate you bringing this.
Thank you. I'll send you a copy of that
graph, and if any of the members of the committee are
interested, there's one particular recent paper in Science,
which is
quite brief and summarizes the situation, if it's any
use to you.
All right. Well, that'd be useful. So thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you for the hearing.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you very much. It's certainly got me thinking.